So far
we have been declaring variables using the let keyword. But at the beginning of
course, I briefly mentioned that there is another way to declare variables,
using the var keyword. And we see
this in a lot of JavaScript code online. In this lecture
we're going to look at the var keyword, you're going to look at the problems with the var,
and why you should avoid it. So let's start
by defining a function, start, here we're going to
have a loop, let i = 0.
We're going to run this loop 5 times, and
in each iteration we're going to display i on the console.
Now, let's call the start function, save the changes, so we get
numbers 0-4. Now in the last lecture you learned that
i is only accessible inside this block.
So if you try to log i outside this block,
we're going to get an error, i is not defined.
Now I just want to clarify something. We still have the same
concept if I have removed these curly braces, because here we have
a single statement, so the scope of i is still
this block here. Okay? So save the changes,
we still get the same error. However, let's
see what happens when we replace let with var.
Save the changes. What happened to our error? So,
it turns out that i is accessible outside
of this for block. So in the last iteration,
i becomes 5. Because 5 is not less than 5
so the loop terminates, and here on line 6, we're displaying
the current value of i. So this is the issue with the var
keyword. When you declare a variable with var. It's scope,
is not limited to the block in which it's defined.
It's limited to the function in which it's defined, and this
is not how most or all programming languages work.
It's one of those weird things in JavaScript that we have had for a long time.
So before ES6, var was the only way to declare
variables in constants. Starting from ES6, also
called ES2015, now we have two new keywords
let and const, to define different variables and constants. These
two keywords create block scope variables,
but car creates function scoped
variables. Let's take a look at another example. So in this
for loop, let's add a code block here,
now I'm going to add an if statement,
now in the if block I'm going to declare a variable
using var, color set it to red. Now technically
in almost all programming languages out there, this variables
should only be accessible in this block. But because we have
used var, color is accessible anywhere
in this function. So, at the end of this function, you can log
color, save the changes, look we get red here.
But if we replace var with let,
you get an error, because color is not accessible here.
And that's how most languages work. So this is the first problem,
with the var keyword. The second issue is with global
variables. So let's delete all the code here, I'm going to declare
two variables one with var color we set it to
red, and one with let. Let's say
age and set it to 30. Now when we use
var, outside of a function, this creates a global variable
and attaches that global variable to the window object in the
browser. So in browsers we have this window object,
which is a complex object with lots of proprties
and methods. When you want to build frontend applications you're going to work
with this window object a lot. Now what matters here
is this var keyword attaches this
color variable to the window object. So if you type window
.look our color variable is here.
In contrast when we use the let keyword to define a global variable,
that global variable is not attached to the window object.
So, if we type window.age you can see it's undefined.
So why is it bad to attach a window to a variable object?
Well, because window object is something central, there is
only one instance of the window object, and let's say you're using
a third party library. If that third party library also has a
variable with the same name, that variable can override your
variable. So you should avoid adding stuff to the window object.
Otherwise you're going to create all sorts of issues in your program. So,
for a curious developer, I need to mention that when we define a function
let's say say hi, this function
is technically a global function and is added to the
window object. So let me save the changes. If you type window.
sayHi, see our function is here so we can call it.
So technically this is a global function, it's attached to the window
object, and that is bad practice. But how can we prevent this? Well,
later in the course where I talk about modules, you will learn how to
encapsulate these functions in separate modules so they are not
added to the window object. So here's what I want you to take away from this
lecture. Avoid using the var keyword, because it creates variables
that are function scope, not block scope.